Tasatoi Alley




There’s a great barbershop down Tasatoi Alley in Chiang Mai, Thailand. It’s easy to find. His shop only has two walls. He doesn’t even show up on Google Maps. 

When living abroad, it’s important to prepare before going to a haircut. If it’s your first time at that shop, then it’s even more important. The preparation should start months early when you get your previous haircut. 


=====



You get your hair cut in Chiang Mai, Thailand for a buck fifty at a barber shop with only two walls on Tasatoi Alley. 

It’s a thirty second walk from your apartment. Anyone else would need to go north along Route 106, then turn into the narrow alley which has no name. It’s just after Iron Bridge and just before Duke’s. It’s too narrow for a car, so they’d have to walk or guide a scooter through it. 

The alley is on the right, obviously. On the left is the river.

That narrow path opens to Tasatoi Alley, facing a large gated building which Google Maps insists is a government pawn shop. You have your doubts. 

Go north along Tasatoi Alley. In less than a minute down the road—just past the fire station—he’ll be on your left. He’s across the road from the street food vendor grilling meat kebab for thirty cents a stick. 

He invites you to sit in his one barber chair. You do so, and you are perfectly at ease. You are proud that you are at ease. You did not feel this way during the first haircut abroad. 

It was in South Korea and you were fresh out of college working a gig as a preschool English teacher. 

You didn’t speak Korean and the hair stylist didn’t speak English. After a few futile attempts of trying to communicate, you simply began saying yes to every question. You put the fate of your hair in her hands. 

Another time, after you learned enough Korean to say numbers and make basic requests, you asked a hair stylist to cut 5cm off. He must have misunderstood and thought you wanted to cut your hair down to only 5cm left. It was the first time you’ve been able to see your scalp. 

Another time, a hair stylist refused to accept number measurements and instead wanted you to tell her when was the last time you got a haircut. Another time, a hair stylist wouldn’t cut your hair until you chose a style from a magazine. You didn’t want a style. You wanted what you had, but shorter. 

After years of living abroad, you’ve developed a system. The first time you came to the barbershop with two walls on Tasatoi Alley and he asked what you wanted, you pulled out your phone and showed him a picture of yourself. It’s a picture you took immediately after a time when you got a good haircut. 

You have copies of this picture on five different devices. This picture is valuable to your life abroad. 

You showed him the picture and he said, “Okay.” And then he cut your hair.

Easy. No hassle. You don’t like hassle at the hair shop because you have no idea what you’re doing with your hair. 

Growing up, you had the Sunday school haircut. Hair neatly combed to the side. Part on the left. 

You didn’t think it was a hairstyle. It was just hair, and this is what you did with it. 

One day on a camping trip during your years in high school in Alaska, you didn’t shower or comb your hair. Some girls from your class said it looked good. 

And that was it. You’ve never combed your hair again since. 

That change in hairstyle revitalized you. It showed you that you can take control of your life. Thanks Nicole and Rachel. Or was it Lauren and Katrina? It was so long ago. Their faces swap in your memory each time you think of their names. 

As you sit at your laptop right now, sipping whiskey and writing this story, you have a yearning to go back to being a high school student in Alaska. Adventures during summer vacation. Youthful excitement for the expanse of time that lay ahead. Bones that didn’t crackle when you walked up stairs. 

The yearning is so consuming that you stop typing. At 1 a.m., you walk up and down the hallway/balcony of the hotel/apartment where you stay/live as you sip/gulp whiskey and remember about how it used to be. 

[Picture of balcony]

You’re not far off from the freedom you had back then, you know? No wife, no kids. No home address, no car, no job. Working for yourself on your own schedule. Twilight zone dimension in Thailand where the vastness of the universe has shrunk down to the size of your apartment and an internet connection. 

You do already exist in suspended time, don’t you? You live inside your head. Your universe expands inwards instead of outwards.

One day, you walk by the mirror. You look at it this time, and you’re shocked to see a grown man looking back at you. In your mind, you thought you were still seven years old. You’d hope tonight you could watch Christmas specials on the TV with your family as Dad kept the fireplace burning warm. Mom had just finished giving you a haircut.

But as you walk along that balcony, you step light on your right knee. That’s the one that crackles. A reminder that linear time marches on, whether you mentally march with it or not. You’re a 35 year old man in a studio apartment in Thailand, and there is no going back to then. 

Instead, how about the next best thing? How about a new hairstyle? That’ll revitalize you. It worked in high school.

Sitting at the barbershop on Tasatoi Alley, today you pull out a new picture. It’s not that picture of you. It’s a picture of a fashion model. 

The model’s hair is short on the sides and medium on the top. You got this idea from a forum online. They said short hair on the sides was good for people with long faces. Your face is long. Or at least, that’s the impression you got when you looked at the mirror a month ago. 

“Oh, very handsome,” the barber says.

“I hope so,” you say.

He lays the nylon gown over you. You adjust within it, trying to find a position in which you can sit comfortably without moving so you don’t disturb his work. 

He begins with the electric clippers. That’s how you knew he was the barber for you. If someone begins with those comb-toothed scissors that cut your hair without it getting shorter, you never go back to them. 

You don’t get haircuts often because you don’t remember you have hair often. You live in your head. It’s not until your hair obstructs vision that you remember you should get a haircut. Not until you can feel the weight of the hair on your head. 

So when you sit down for a haircut, you’re not looking for maintenance. You’re looking for deforestation. Fill the chainsaw with gasoline and start chopping.

What you’ve learned is that the simpler a barbershop looks, the better the barber will understand your goal. 

If a place has fluorescent lights, if they call the employees “hair artists,” if they have a wall dedicated to elite hair gels, then you’re out. They’ll do some fancy treatment, but you’ll leave with your hair no shorter than when you came in. It’ll just smell better. 

As the barber on Tasatoi Alley chops your hair, you realize he’s one of the good ones. Another good one was the lady in Shanghai, China who lived in a room above her shop and cut your hair down to manageable lengths for three bucks. 

The other good one was a shop you found when you lived in the California desert behind a motel in a white shed on a dirt lot with no neighbors. Back there, you went to a barber at a place called “Barber Shop.”

It was owned by a 70 year old man with no employees. You’d go in for a haircut on your lunch break. He was asleep every time you walked in the door. Opening the door would wake him. 

He’d welcome you and ask if you wanted the regular and you’d say yes. He’d pull out the electric clippers and start chopping. That man knew how to chop some hair.

His haircuts were $12. With the tip, $14

When you walked by the barbershop on Tasatoi Alley and saw it had only two walls, you knew it was the place for you. This is a shop with no pretension. 

He orbits you as he chops and slices with the electric clippers. Your hair falls to the floor like a blanket. 

Through the wall-mounted mirror, you watch Chiang Mai life move on. Cars and scooters pass by on Tasatoi Alley. Folks walk along the street. Some stop to buy from the kebab shop. 

The barber apologizes for the heat. You tell him it’s no problem. You like the heat. 

You think of the date and realize that it’s winter. You had forgotten that winter was a thing. Now, you feel a little better about not being able to go back to being a high school student in Alaska.

The brrr of the clippers and snipping of the scissors close to your ears works as an ASMR experience, lulling you into a meditative state as you reflect on Alaska and Thailand, youth and age, barbershops and meat kebab. The barber speaks and snaps you back to now.

“Is it okay?” The haircut has finished.

“Yes. Good, good,” you say. You always say that it’s good. You have no idea what you’re doing with hair, from Sunday school haircuts given by your mom to bed-head hairstyles suggested by girls from school.

But now for the first time, you’ve got a hairstyle of your own choosing. It’s only a small change, but it’s your change. And it does look good. 

Or at least, you feel like it looks good. You have no idea what you’re doing with hair, but you believe you’ve found a good barbershop in Chiang Mai, Thailand.



===========



The barber with two walls on Tasatoi alley doesn’t ask you about centimeters or calendar months or magazine styles. He asks you about three sizes: short, medium, long.

You don’t know what these sizes mean in relation to each other. You just tell him short on the sides and medium on top. Plus, you showed him the picture for reference.

He starts with the electric clippers and chops away. When he finishes with the clippers, he wraps them in a soaked towel. You assume the towel cools his aged and worn clippers. 

He then moves on to the scissors, 


(I want to mention cars passing behind me, the heat. But i want to mention it earlier? Not sure)
. 






===1======


You like the fact that his barbershop only has two walls. It’s the main reason you chose him. You look for simplicity in a barbershop. 

The barber with two walls on Tasatoi Alley doesn’t ask you what style you’re going for. He doesn’t make you choose a headshot from a magazine of pensive-looking models. The barber with two walls on Tasatoi Alley gives you three options: long, short, or medium.

What does long, short, or medium mean? Try each and find out.

Who cares. It’s just hair. You don’t care about your hairstyle because you don’t know what your hair looks like because you don’t know what you look like.

You live life inside your head. Life to you is words and ideas. Theories and arguments. Sometimes you accidentally look up as you pass by a mirror, and it’s a shock as you remember you’ve got a whole body, with arms and legs and hair and everything.

When you first got to Thailand, you went to a few typical salons with the glass windows. The posters of glamor models. The young hair stylists who inspect each hair like they’re sculpting a statue. 

What’s the name of those weird comb-toothed scissors? The ones where they can cut your hair as many times as they like, and it never gets shorter? You know you’re in for a bad haircut when the hair stylist starts with those. You know you’re going to look in a mirror at the end of the haircut and see that your hair is no shorter than when you came in.

This is why you don’t like going to salons. You like going to barbershops. The simpler the better. And it doesn’t get any simpler than a barbershop with only two walls. Any less walls, and it wouldn’t even be a building.

The barber with two walls on Tasatoi Alley doesn’t start with the comb-toothed scissors. He starts with the electric clippers. That’s how you know this is the barber for you.

When you get a haircut, you’re not going in for landscaping. You’re going in for damage control. You don’t need a pruning, you need deforestation. Rev up the chainsaw and start hacking. 

==2===

In China, your apartment complex had a lady who did haircuts for just over three bucks, and they were far better than the fancy salon down the road. 

When you lived in the California desert behind a motel in a white shed on a dirt lot with no neighbors, you went to a barber who had a shop simply called “Barber Shop.”

It was owned by a 70 year old man with no employees. You’d go in for a haircut on your lunch break. He was asleep every time you walked in the door. Opening the door would wake him up. You always felt guilty, but you also felt like your hair was too long.

He’d welcome you in and ask if you wanted the regular and you’d say yes. He’d pull out the electric clipper and start chopping. God bless that man, he knew how to cut some hair.

As he cut, he’d begin waking up. He’d ask you where you work, and you’d tell him you were a reporter at the local newspaper down the road. You had told him this every time you came to his shop for nearly two years. 

He’d ask you about the job and about what you have going on and then he’d somehow drift off into talking about his own life. He’d talk about the sons that he’d told you about twenty times before. But most of all, he’d talk about money. No matter what the conversation started with, it would somehow find its way back to talking about money. Every time.

He’d tell you about his son who just got a job at some energy company, and he was gonna be making the big bucks. He’d tell you about the rich girl he used to date in Los Angeles. He’d tell you about how he used to be rolling in money back when he was (DOING SOMETHING)


=====3=======

Growing up, your mom did your haircuts. She’d tell you when you should cut your hair because it was too long. Then she’d cut it. It was so simple. This was the peak of your life experience with hair. 

You had that Sunday school boy haircut, with the hair swept to the side and a clean part on the right. You used gel to keep your wavy hair in place.  You didn’t think of it as a hairstyle. It was just hair, and this is what you did with it.

One day in high school while camping with friends, you went out without showering or doing anything to your bedhead hair, its wavy mess growing skyward like an Amazon jungle. Some girls you knew said that it looked good. You’ve never combed your hair again a day in your life. Nicole Gregson and Rachel Daly, thank you if you’re reading this. I’m pretty sure it was you, anyhow.

As you sit there sipping a beer and writing this, you have an urge to go back to try being a high schooler in Alaska again. You can go on adventures in the summer months. You can feel excitement for all the things you’ll do when you’re older. This urge is so strong that you have to stop typing for a moment and walk up and down the alley along the balcony of the hotel/apartment you stay at.  

As you walk, you’re gentle on your right knee. Yeah, you’re no high school kid in Alaska anymore. You’re a 35 year old man in a studio apartment in Thailand, and there’s no going back. 

Instead, maybe you can try the next best thing. How about a new hairstyle?

You tell the barber to keep it medium on the top, but short on the sides. 

You saw it on some online forum. Long faces do well with short on the sides. It’s the equivalent to getting advice from one of those magazines in the checkout line at the grocery story. But why not. You don’t know anything about hair.

Every time you see yoursel fin the mirror, it’s confusing. . You live life in you head an di’m fucking drunk










======

(You live life inside your head, you nerd. Life to you is theories and arguments and ideas and stories. You’ll go weeks without really looking in a mirror. When you do, it’s a shock as you realize you’re a whole person with two arms and two legs and everything. 

And hair. )












Cutting hair requires delicate communication, and you could not speak Korean. On a good day with a full eight hours of sleep, you could successfully count to 10. 

Anxiety caused you to put off a hair cut until your hair obstructed your vision. The day before going into the salon, you studied up on Korean numbers and words for measurements. 

Even back in America, you never knew what to tell barbers when they asked you how much hair you wanted to cut. You had no idea what you looked like or how you should look. You’d go a week without looking in the mirror. Each time you looked in the mirror, you were shocked by what looked back. You still thought you were seven years old, but there was a grown man looking back at you in the mirror. A grown man with long, messy hair.

So when you got a haircut in America, you’d tell them one and a half inches. You didn’t know how long one and a half inches was. You thought it just sounded like you knew what you were talking about. All you wanted was for them to cut off some hair and not hassle you about it. 

In Korea, you decided it would be about four centimeters. You practiced the number four. You practiced the word for centimeters. You went to bed and got a full eight hours of sleep. 

When you got to the barbershop and delivered your one-line act of “Sa centi ka-juseyo,” the hair stylist looked back at you in confusion. You repeated “Sa centi ka-juseyo?” 

You held up four fingers. 

“Sa?” You shake the hand.

The hair stylist pulls out a calendar and flips through it, showing you the months and asking you questions you don’t understand. This was before everyone had smartphones and Google Translate. You were just an unaugmented human in a part of the world you were not from.

Eventually, you work out that she wants you to show her where on the calendar you got your last haircut. You have no idea. You choose a date a few months back. She seems satisfied, and begins cutting your hair. 

Over the years in South Korea, China, and Thailand, you find hair salons that ask you how much you want cut based on hair styles in a magazine, based on arbitrary descriptions of “short” or “long”, and so on. Eventually, you develop the picture method.

At the barbershop with two walls on Tasatoi Alley in Chiang Mai, you pull out your phone and show him a picture of yourself which you took immediately after the last haircut you were happy with. 

“Okay,” he says.

“Okay,” you say.

No hassle. Simple efficiency. 







=====================

This one is easy. He’s just down the road. I don’t know why you think we have to write a whole thing about it. But okay, here we are. 


=====you can get a good haircut for a buck fifty at=====you get your haircut for a buck fifty at======

There’s a good barber in Chiang Mai, Thailand on Tasatoi Alley. Find it by going north along Route 106. Turn down that little alleyway which has no name. It’s just after the Iron Bridge and just before Duke’s. It’s too narrow for a car, so you’ll have to walk or guide your scooter through it. 

And the alley is on the right, obviously. On the left is the river. 

This isn’t relevant to the barber, but as you pass through the narrow walls of this alley, stop for a moment and look at the Sacred Fig tree on the left of the path. You might be able to see the large Tokay Gecko that lives in it. 

Those are the geckos you hear at night going “Eh-ah. Eh-ah.” When you first got to Thailand, you thought you were hearing chicken. 

That narrow path will open up to Tasatoi Alley, facing a large gated building which Google Maps insists is a government pawn shop. You have your doubts. 

Go north along Tasatoi Alley. In less than a minute down the road—just past the fire station—he’ll be on your left. He’s across the road from the street food vendor grilling meat kebab for thirty cents a stick. 

He’s easy to find because you’ll see him at work. Everyone sees him at work. His shop only has two walls.

You enter his shop and ask if he has time for a haircut. He says yes and guides you to sit in his one barber chair. 

On your phone, you show him a picture of a model with how you want your hair cut.

He says, “Oh, very handsome.”

“Yeah, I suppose so,” you say, looking again at the picture. “Anyhow, is this okay?”

He looks again at the picture. He says, “Short on side. Medium on top. Yes yes, okay.”

It’s the same picture you showed him last time. You had the same conversation last time. 

You find great satisfaction in the simple efficiency of the picture method. Your first haircut while living abroad was an anxiety-inducing experience. 

You had just started work as an English teacher in South Korea. Mere months before, you had been a student yourself. You were helpless when it came to the language. On a good day, you could count to ten. 

After letting your hair grow so long that it was obstructing your vision, you decided it was time to get it cut. You walked into the closest salon you could find, communicating mostly through miming.

Then she sat you down and asked how many centimeters you wanted to cut. You should have expected it, but that threw you off. Even back in America when they asked in familiar, freedom-loving inches, you never knew what to tell them. No matter how long your hair was, you went with one point five inches because you felt it sounded like you knew what you were talking about. 

As the sweet Korean hair stylist watched, you crawled back into the deep recesses of your mind, trying to remember the conversion from inches to centimeters. 1 inch equals 2.5478 centimeters. Is that it? Shoot, what’s 2.5478 times 1.5?

The hair stylist breaks your concentration. She’s holding up four fingers one one hand and five fingers on other hand while looking at you and saying, “Sa? Oh?”

“Sa?” shakes the hand with the four fingers.

“Oh?” shakes the hand with the five fingers? Wide, inquisitive eyes.

“Oh.” you say.

Five is a good clean number. 

The next time you went to another barber in Korea, you sat down and confidently told her “Oh centi, kamsahamnida.”

Wide, inquisitive eyes.

She takes out a calendar and starts showing you different months. You don’t understand, but eventually you work out that she doesn’t intend to ask how much hair you want cut. She wants to know when was the last time you got a haircut. 

Another time, the hair stylist insists on you picking a picture from a magazine for the hairstyle you want. You don’t want a style, you just want your hair to look like your hair, but shorter. 

Thus, you create the picture method. After you get one good haircut, immediately take a picture of yourself. Now anywhere you go and any language they speak, show the barber this picture. No hassle. Simple efficiency. 

======every time, he apologies for the heat and asks if you’re okay. You say you’re okay. You say you’re great. You know there are other places. You choose to come heree====


 ======hat maybe no. hairstyle maybe no. stuff relevant to being abroad, yes.======


You don’t know his name because you’ve never asked. He’s never asked your name, either. Names don’t have much value in getting to know someone. 

When living abroad, it’s important to do your preparation before getting a haircut. So before heading out, you download a picture of what you want your hair to look like. 

You’re trying something new. The last time you tried something new was in high school. 

Growing up, you had the Sunday school boy haircut. Hair neatly combed down with a part on the left side. You didn’t think of it as a style. It was just hair, and this is what you did with it. 

One day in high school on a camping trip, you went out without taking a shower or combing your hair. Some girls you knew said it looked good. You’ve never combed your hair again since. 

Every haircut since then, you’ve told the barber you want it “even all around.” You didn’t know what that meant, but it sounded right. All you wanted was for your hair to look like it did a month or so ago at your last haircut. 

Your wavy hair didn’t seem to care much if this barber did something a little different from that barber. The result was the same frizzy puffball on your head. 




======

Do you remember that first haircut you got while living abroad? It was in South Korea, and it was terrifying. You let your hair grow down past your eyes before finally walking into a barber shop.

Of course, that was easier when you were wearing the hat (We can reintroduce this later on by adding in the hair past the eyes bit. )




=====
(after haircut person asks how many centimeters)

Even back in America, you never knew how many inches to tell them. You always went with one and a half. It sounded like you knew what you were talking about, and one and a half inches of hair is certainly shorter than your hair was now.

Shorter is the only goal for you. 


========


One day while you were towards the end of your university years, Dad asked what you wanted to do after you graduated. You said you didn’t know, but you wanted to travel. He asked how you would afford that, and you said you didn’t know. He mentioned that on a business trip to South Korea, he heard there are a lot of foreigners teaching English there. I was graduating with a degree in English literature. 

=====

As he cut, he’d begin waking up. He’d ask you where you work, and you’d tell him you were a reporter at the local newspaper down the road. You had told him this every time you came to his shop for two years. 

He’d ask about the job and you’d tell him about the local school district board meetings and the new government water agency looking into the water shortage. 

When you finished, he’d talk about his sons and tell you the same stories he had told you twenty times before. 

And no matter what, he would always drift the conversation back to money. Money his son was making. The money owned by the family of this girl he had dated in Miami. The money he made back in the day. Once the topic got to money, that was the only street and there were no exits. 


